
In the UK, there are volume builders, like Persimmon, and Taylor-Wimpey.  And there are the guys who build your extension.
Actually, there are some middle-size firms that employ a lot of bricklayers, but actually are almost invisible to the general public,
because their only customers are the volume house builders, who don't actually employ any bricklayers at all, because
their value add is to get planning permission for the most profitable type of development, not to build anything better or cheaper.

The guys who build your extension are probably incorporated. I'm not sure if it's always been like this, but when Gordon Brown
dropped the Corporation Tax rate to ten percent for small companies, every dog groomer and his dog incorporated. Of course,
a year later when the rate disappeared, it became easier to remain incorporated, because going bankrupt as a limited company 
has far fewer consequences than doing so as a private individual. And the building industry is notoriously cyclical, and small 
builders go bust all the time. Because no building project every goes completely smoothly, and occasionally a client is sufficiently 
incensed that he withholds payment, or even sues successfully.

From the point of view of the client, this is a very bad situation to be in. However good the Minor Works Building Contract (https://www.ribabooks.com/jctminor-works-building-contract-2016-mw_9780414052543)
is, it doesn't help a client whose builder has gone into liquidation. The obvious reaction, one would have thought, is to avoid builders with thinly 
capitalized corporations. But you can't! None of them put any assets, beyond the odd van and office computer and printer, on the balance sheet. 
Maybe there are a couple of exceptions, but not where you actually need a builder. You can probably use a structural engineer who is based a hundred
miles away, you really, really can't use a builder who is so remote. There is not even any point in trying: he'll refuse to get into any sort 
of discussion.

The usual approach is to talk to a lot of builders, and possibly to their some of their previous clients (or, at least few who will good reference).
This can work, but it means that you have to have a lot of trust.

they employ contract lawyers and
planning law experts instead.
